# santoso2017_enso-description

ENSO is year-to-year deviation from this seasonally evolving climatological state in which anomalous warming of the eastern equatorial Pacific during an El Niño is associated with weaker than normal Walker Circulation, marked by slackened Trade Winds, east-west atmospheric pressure gradient, and thermocline tilt (Figure 2).  These elements interact in a positive Bjerknes coupled feedback loop whereby the eastern Pacific warming induces weaker winds which in turn deepen the thermocline, thus further promoting surface warming. The feedback cycle continues toward the end of the calendar year when damping processes start to take over.  Associated with this surface warming, the WPWP shifts eastward, and the ITCZ and SPCZ move equatorward, significantly increasing precipitation in the otherwise dry eastern equatorial Pacific.  La Niña generally describes the opposite, but this generalisation appears loose in particular when ENSO is viewed from the lens of its extremes as discussed in this present review paper[@Santoso2017].

The climatological elements of the tropical Pacific, such as the Trade Winds, warm pool, cold tongue, thermocline, including the geometry of the basin, allow accumulation and lag times for their interactions to result in roughly 2 years for an El Niño to develop, peak, and decay, followed by a La Niña, and so forth in a quasi-cyclical fashion [@Santoso2017].

The tropical Pacific contains the essential geographical and physical elements that generate and support ENSO existence, all of which have evolved throughout Earth’s history.  In a world without land masses there would not be an ENSO, as there are no meridional boundaries that can support such zonal mode of variability. In essence, ENSO exists due to the fact that the tropical Pacific features equatorward blowing Trade Winds that veer westward under Coriolis force, accumulating enormous volume of water above 28°C toward the Maritime Continent (Figure 1), termed the western Pacific warm pool (WPWP).  The warm pool fuels rigorous convection of moist air, forming the ascending branch of the Walker Circulation.  This large-scale movement of air mass descends over the dry eastern equatorial Pacific, marked by a tongue of upwelled cooler waters that extend north-westward off the South American coast due to the Trades.  The Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), a rainfall band of atmospheric convection sits just north of this “cold tongue”, extending to the west toward the WPWP. One other major convective zone is the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ), a rain band extending southeastward from the warm pool towards the French Polynesia.  Associated with this climatological setup, the atmospheric sea level pressure is lower in the western tropical Pacific than in the eastern tropical Pacific.  To maintain a balance with the atmosphere, the oceanic thermocline - a sharp boundary separating warm upper waters from cold deeper waters (typically marked by the 20°C isotherm) - shoals eastward, reaching as shallow as 30 m in the far eastern Pacific, and up to 200 m in the vicinity of the WPWP. This climatological state varies seasonally in response to the seasonal march of solar irradiance with a slight lag owing to the high heat capacity of the ocean. The cold tongue and the Trade Winds intensify in boreal summer as the ITCZ marches poleward.  Meanwhile, precipitation decreases over the eastern equatorial Pacific reaching a monthly average value of less than 1 mm day-1. The cold tongue then warms toward boreal spring, as the ITCZ shifts equatorward and the easterly winds weaken [@Santoso2017].
