- ## Tasks
<!-- --- -->
- ### YouTube
	- English = larger potential audience.
	- Spanish = niche community.
		+ Provide expertise in communities where it lacks.
<!-- --- -->
- ### Logseq
	- FOSS.
	- Workflow focused on *outlines* not mini-essays.
	- **Greater modularity**
	- Notes are hard to read
		+ Forces economical note-taking.

<!-- --- -->
- ### Integrated Coastal Zone Management
	- **Integrated Coastal Zone Management:** Dynamic, continuous, and iterative process designed to promote sustainable management of coastal zones.
	- Focus on the **land side of the coastal zone:**
		+ Coastal plain.
		+ Nearshore marine environment.
	- **Ecosystem approach to coastal management** (seeing ecosystems as complex webs of interactions).
	- **Goals of ICZM:**
		+ Economic development and human use of coastal zones.
		+ Protect, preserve and restore.
		+ Minimize loss of life, property and infrastructure.
		+ Ensure public access to and enjoyment of the coastal zone.
		+ All within the limits set by natural dynamics and carrying capacity.
	- **The word *integrated*** refers to integration of:
		+ Multiple objectives.
		+ Multiple instruments and polcies needed to meet those objectives.
		+ All relevant policy areas, sectors and levels of administration.
		+ Multiple disciplines.
		+ Both terrestrial and marine components.
	- **Stepwise, circular process:**
		1. Information collection
		1.
		2. Stakeholder involvement
		3. Development of measures
		4. Decision making
		5. Management
	- **A separate, legally binding directive does not exist in Europe**, but integrated management is demanded from different international agreements, EU guidelines and directives, national landscape and spatial planning).
	- A **Systems Approach Framework (SAF) for ICZM** shall reduce the time that is needed between the recognition of a problem and the implementation of a solution. Climate change, sea level rise and other coastal pressures demand fast solutions, so we cannot spend 30 years from the recognition of a problem to its solution as has often happened in the past.
<!-- --- -->
- ### Global Sea Level Rise
	+ About 3.1 mm/year during the last two decades.
<!-- --- -->
- ### Marine Spatial Planning
