# Central-Pacific El Niño-Southern Oscillation less predictable under greenhouse warming

@Chen2024

ENSO is the dominant mode of interannual climate variability in the tropical Pacific.

A robust intensifying trend of the magnitude of sea surface temperature anomaly associated with ENSO variability has been projected in the next century under various emission scenarios.

ENSO's response to global warming has far-reaching implications for the global climate system, including slowing the rate of future mid-latitude Southern Ocean warming and accelerating Antarctic shelf ocean warming.

Here, using outputs from the latest climate models participating in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6), we find a robust decrease of predictability of CP ENSO, associated with the increase of the spring predictability barrier (SPB) strength, suggesting less predictable CP ENSO in a future warming climate. In contrast, there is no significant change for EP ENSO predictability.

Since part of the ENSO predictability is contributed by the sea surface temperature anomaly persistence, the reduced persistence and increased strength of the spring persistence barrier of CP ENSO in a warming climate should contribute to reduced predictability.

These results suggest that CP ENSO predictability will likely decrease, mainly due to the difficulty of prediction to pass through the boreal spring in a future warming climate.

Increased SPB strength and earlier SPB timing of CP ENSO suggest that the future CP ENSO predictability will decline to a certain level in an earlier timing. Therefore, CP ENSO will be more unpredictable in the future.

For the future climate, the ACC of CP ENSO is significantly reduced compared to the present-day climate when the forecast is made through the boreal spring, leading to a stronger SPB and reduced predictability.

The persistence barrier and SPB strength in the recharge oscillator model vary with $a_21$ and $a_22$. When $a_21$ decreases (stronger damping of the system), the strengths of the persistence barrier and SPB both strengthen. HOwever, when $a_22$ increases (stronger coupling effect of thermocline depth on SSTA), the strength increases for the persistence barrier, but decreases for the SPB. FOr the relationshop between the persistence barrier and SPB strength in the recharge oscillator model, the role of decreasing $a_21$ and and increasing $a_22$ is opposite, consistent with previous findings. This implies that the ehanced CP ENSO SPB strength under global warming is caused by the decreasing $a_21$ via increasing the CP ENSO damping rate.
