## Tasks
- [x] Ask Diego about his choice of corpo.
	- [ ] Email hackathon about choice of corpo (default to facsa)
- [ ] Email Amanda about choice of master's and career path.
- [ ] Read and take notes on half of Wang et al.

## Talley et al. --- Chapter 10.8 El Niño/La Niña and the Southern Oscillation (ENSO)

### [El Niño Southern Oscillation](el-nino-southern-oscillation)

### [The ENSO Cycle](enso-cycle)

### Global Effects of ENSO

El Niño/La Niña events have large and sometimes davastating impacts on ocean ecosystems, particularly along the South American coast, but also as far north as the California Current System. ENSO impacts air temperature and precipitation on global scales via popagation of large-scale waves throughout the atmosphere and popagation of Kelvin waves along the eastern boundary of the Pacific. Precipitation anomalies during a composite El NIño include regions of anomalously low precipitation that are susceptible to drought and fire and high precipitaton that are susceptible to flooding. Although it is not located in the tropics, U.S air temperatures are affected by ENSO; El Niño signatures include anomalous warmth over the northwest and high plains; cool temperatures in the south and Florida; anomalously dry conditions in the northwest, east and Appalachians; and wet conditions from California through the southeastern U.S.

## Wang et al.

TAO/TRITON array of about 70 moored buoys most of them equipped with a 500 m thermistor chain and meteorological sensors. 5--7 buoys at the equator are equipped with acoustic doppler current profilers and current meters. The observed data is transmitted via satellites to data centers where they are compiled and made available in near-real time.

The evolution of El Niño and La Niña can be seen in the SST, zonal wind, and 20ºC isotherm depth (a proxy for thermocline depth) anomalies of the TAO/TRITON array data along the equator.
