## Tasks

- [x] Finish hydrobiology presentation
- [ ] Read next R&D paper
- [ ] Revise ogeo syllabus

## Effects of Seasonal Stratification on Organisms

### Charles et al.

During autumn through late spring, the water mass is well mixed, and phytoplankton biomass,  ranging from 0.2 to 1.4 mg Chl-a m-3, is relatively high.

However, during summer,  the input of solar radiation causes thermal stratification, creating a warm surface water layer  separated from the deeper cold-water mass. The upper water layer becomes depleted in nutrients,  and the deep water becomes light-limited. Consequently, phytoplankton biomass  drastically decreases by one to two orders of magnitude.

This period typically follows a spring phytoplankton bloom and is sometimes succeeded by smaller  blooms in autumn. Therefore, most of the carbon export to the seafloor  occurs outside the summer period.

Stable isotope analysis revealed changes in the structure of the benthic food web in response to the seasonal stratification of the water column. Specifically, the niche space contracted during the warm conditions, predominantly affecting low trophic level consumers.

During warm season, the majority of the phytoplankton biomass, primarily composed of picoplankton cells is concentrated within a deep chlorophyll maximum situated below the thermocline. Phytoplankton are preyed upon by zooplankton, leading the entire pelagic food chain to adopt a distribution patter based on the peak abundance of prey within a spatial scale of a few meters.

### McAllen et al.

Lough Hyne, an Irish marine nature reserve is a marine lake with a restricted shallow connection (semi-enclosed basin).

Mostly the Lough has a maximum depth of 20-25 m and is oxic throughout the year, despite a pronounced summer thermocline. However there is a deeper (40-
50 m) portion, the Western Trough, known for many years to feature
profound summer hypoxia below the thermocline on a regular basis,
with the oxygen-depleted Trough water being replaced by oxic water
in the winter months.

There is abundant evidence that many mobile animals respond behaviourally to oxygen gradients and avoid hypoxic areas.

SCUBA and ROV observations.

Mobile scavengers (mainly crustaceans and fish), plentiful in the shallower, oxic parts of the Trough, will not enter the deeper parts of the Trough below the oxy-thermocline during the height of the summer when the oxygen concentrations are negligible.

SCUBA observations in the oxy-thermocline transition zone itself
during August demonstrated live and dead spionid worms, dormant/
moribund Jaxea and dead priapulids. ROV filming at this time showed
burrow structures in the transition zone, but no burrows below it. This
suggests that the resident burrowers are subject to mass mortality
each summer, though there may be some possibility of escape to
shallower oxic areas from the peripheral transition zones. However,
each Winter and Spring a thriving community of burrowers develops
throughout the Trough, suggesting recolonization based upon the rich
organic material accumulated as a result of that mortality.

Overall our study shows that pronounced seasonal fluctuations in
oxygen concentration have profound effects on benthic population
dynamics in the Western Trough of Lough Hyne.

However, it is also evident that the effects of seasonal hypoxia/
anoxia on mobile species differ from effects on more sedentary/sessile
forms.

### Aspillaga et al.

Acoustic telemetry study.

The swimming depth the common dentex was strongly influenced by the temperature variations caused by the thermal structure of the water column.

Common dentex demonstrated a clear preference for the suprathermoclinal warm water over the cold water below the thermocline.

Either:
- The common dentex selects its thermal niche, presumably to approach the optimal temperature for growth and/or foraging in order to increase an individual's net energy gain.
- The observed movement behaviour of the common dentex was driven by indirect effects such as food distribution.

Figure 5. Relationship between mean fish depths and mean thermocline depths during the summer season, factorized by day/night periods, for each tagged fish (n = 12). Solid black lines represent the logistic models adjusted for each individual, and the magenta line is the mean prediction for the population. Black dotted lines highlight pure linear (1:1) relationships. Grey line and box in the bottom represent the median and the first and third quartiles, respectively, of the depths measured for each fish outside the summer period.
